## _Student Instructions for Running Molecular Dynamics of Real Gases Example on a Linux Instance in the Amazon Web Services Cloud_

1.	Open a browser and navigate to [https://aws.amazon.com/console/](https://aws.amazon.com/console/)
	1. Log in with the Account ID and credentials (username and password) provided by your instructor
	2. Click EC2 or type EC2 into the search bar
	3. Click Instances (running)
	4. Find your Instance (labeled with your username) and click on the Instance ID value
	5. Click Connect
	6. Click Session Manager
	7. Click Connect to open a command line terminal in a new browser tab

2.	In the terminal the default shell is the Bourne shell. We recommend switching to the Bash shell by typing `bash` on the command line. Then type `cd` to navigate to the home directory.

3.	We will walk through a sample calculation from the molecular dynamics lab described in the [article](https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jchemed.7b00747) entitled "Facilitating Students’ Interaction with Real Gas Properties Using a Discovery-Based Approach and Molecular Dynamics Simulations":

	Chelsea Sweet, Oyewumi Akinfenwa, and Jonathan J. Foley IV
_Journal of Chemical Education_ **2018** _95_ (3), 384-392.
DOI: 10.1021/acs.jchemed.7b00747


	3.1. Change into the `MolecularDynamics` directory by typing:
	
	```sh
	cd MolecularDynamics
	```
	
	3.2. To execute MD.exe and run a simulation, type:
	
	```sh
	 ./MD.exe
	```

	3.3. The program will wait for you to enter a title.  Several output files will be generated by the program for further analysis, and the title you enter will be used as the prefix for each of these files.  In this example, we will simulate Argon at 300 K and 100 moles/m3, so the following will be entered as the title:
	
	```sh
	Ar_300K_100
	```
	
	To simulate Argon, type Ar:
	
	```sh
	Ar
	```
	
	To initialize the gas with a velocity distribution that corresponds to 300 K, type 300:
	
	```sh
	300
	```
	
	To initialize the number density as 100 moles/m<sup>3</sup>, type 100:
	
	```sh
	100
	```
	
	Once you press Enter the calculation will begin. The calculation should take a couple minutes to complete depending on your processor’s speed. When the calculation is complete, it will output a number of quantities relevant to the simulation, including the average temperature, average pressure, the compressibility, etc.
		
	3.3. To download the data output files we need to copy them into the `/var/www/html/files` directory:

	```sh
 	cp Ar* /var/www/html/files
	```

4.	Download output files. Go back to the other browser tab with the AWS console and copy the IP address of your instance to the clipboard by clicking on the copy icon. Open a new browser tab and click on the search bar. Type `http://` then paste the IP address and hit enter. For example, it would look like: `http://12.34.56.78`. Sign in with the same username and password you used to sign into the AWS console. Right click on each file and save it to disk.




   
  

